lightning: add lightning data source (#10261)
pingcap/docs: tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-data-source.md

You can use *single-quoted* strings (`'…'`) to suppress backslash escaping. For example, `terminator = '\n'` means using the two-character string, a backslash (`\`) followed by the letter `n`, as the terminator, rather than the LF `\n`.

For more details, see the [TOML v1.0.0 specification](https://toml.io/en/v1.0.0#string).

#### `separator`

- Defines the field separator.
- Can be one or multiple characters, but must not be empty.
- Common values:

    * `','` for CSV (comma-separated values).
    * `"\t"` for TSV (tab-separated values).
    * `"\u0001"` to use the ASCII character `0x01`.

- Corresponds to the `FIELDS TERMINATED BY` option in the LOAD DATA statement.

#### `delimiter`

- Defines the delimiter used for quoting.
- If `delimiter` is empty, all fields are unquoted.
- Common values:

    * `'"'` quote fields with double-quote. The same as [RFC 4180](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4180).
    * `''` disable quoting.

- Corresponds to the `FIELDS ENCLOSED BY` option in the `LOAD DATA` statement.

#### `terminator`

- Defines the line terminator.

> - If `terminator` is empty, both `"\r"` (`U+000D` Carriage Return) and `"\n"` (`U+000A` Line Feed) are used as line terminator.

Author: 这里是从原来的英文里 copy 过来的。还是以最新中文为准吧，我改过来

> - If `terminator` is empty, both `"\r"` (`U+000D` Carriage Return) and `"\n"` (`U+000A` Line Feed) are used as line terminator.

Author: ```suggestion
- If `terminator` is empty, both `"\n"` (Line Feed) and `"\r\n"` (Carriage Return + Line Feed) are used as the line terminator.
```

    |----------|--------------------------|
    | `\0`     | Null character (`U+0000`)  |
    | `\b`     | Backspace (`U+0008`)       |
    | `\n`     | Line feed (`U+000A`)       |
    | `\r`     | Carriage return (`U+000D`) |
    | `\t`     | Tab (`U+0009`)             |
    | `\Z`     | Windows EOF (`U+001A`)     |

    In all other cases (for example, `\"`), the backslash is simply stripped, leaving the next character (`"`) in the field. The character left has no special roles (for example, delimiters) and is just an ordinary character.

- Quoting does not affect whether backslash is parsed as escape character.

- Corresponds to the `FIELDS ESCAPED BY '\'` option in the `LOAD DATA` statement.

#### `trim-last-separator`

- Whether to treat `separator` as the line terminator and trim all trailing separators.

    For example, in the following CSV file:

    ```csv
    A,,B,,
    ```

    - When `trim-last-separator = false`, this is interpreted as a row of 5 fields `('A', '', 'B', '', '')`.
    - When `trim-last-separator = true`, this is interpreted as a row of 3 fields `('A', '', 'B')`.

- This option is deprecated. Use the `terminator` option instead.

>     If your old configuration is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If your existing configuration is:
```

    ```toml
    separator = ','
    trim-last-separator = true
    ```

    It is recommended to change the configuration to:

    ```toml
    separator = ','
    terminator = ",\n" # Use ",\n" or ",'\r\n" according to your actual file.
    ```

#### Non-configurable options

TiDB Lightning does not support every option supported by the `LOAD DATA` statement. For example:

* There cannot be line prefixes (`LINES STARTING BY`).

> * The header cannot be simply skipped (`IGNORE n LINES`). The header must be valid column names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The header cannot be skipped (`IGNORE n LINES`) and must be valid column names.
```

### Strict format

> TiDB Lightning works the best when the input files have a uniform size around 256 MiB. When the input is a single huge CSV file, TiDB Lightning can only process the file in one thread, which slows down import speed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TiDB Lightning works best when the input files have a uniform size of around 256 MiB. When the input is a single huge CSV file, TiDB Lightning can only process the file in one thread, which slows down the import speed.
```

This can be fixed by splitting the CSV into multiple files first. For the generic CSV format, there is no way to quickly identify where a row starts or ends without reading the whole file. Therefore, TiDB Lightning by default does *not* automatically split a CSV file. However, if you are certain that the CSV input adheres to certain restrictions, you can enable the `strict-format` setting to allow TiDB Lightning to split the file into multiple 256 MiB-sized chunks for parallel processing.

```toml
[mydumper]
strict-format = true
```

In a strict CSV file, every field occupies only a single line. In other words, one of the following must be true:

* Delimiter is empty.
* Every field does not contain the terminator itself. In the default configuration, this means every field does not contain CR (`\r`) or LF (`\n`).

If a CSV file is not strict, but `strict-format` is wrongly set to `true`, a field spanning multiple lines may be cut in half into two chunks, causing parse failure, or even quietly importing corrupted data.

### Common configuration examples

#### CSV

The default setting is already tuned for CSV following RFC 4180.

```toml
[mydumper.csv]

> separator = ',' # If the data might contain comma (','), it is recommended to use '|+|' or other uncommon character combinations as separator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
separator = ',' # If the data might contain a comma (','), it is recommended to use '|+|' or other uncommon character combinations as the separator.
```

delimiter = '"'
header = true
not-null = false
null = '\N'
backslash-escape = true
```

Example content:

```
ID,Region,Count
1,"East",32
2,"South",\N
3,"West",10
4,"North",39
```

#### TSV

```toml
[mydumper.csv]
separator = "\t"
delimiter = ''
header = true
not-null = false
null = 'NULL'
backslash-escape = false
```

Example content:

```
ID    Region    Count
1     East      32
2     South     NULL
3     West      10
4     North     39
```

#### TPC-H DBGEN

```toml
[mydumper.csv]
separator = '|'
delimiter = ''
terminator = "|\n"
header = false
not-null = true
backslash-escape = false
```

Example content:

```
1|East|32|
2|South|0|
3|West|10|
4|North|39|
```

## SQL

> When TiDB Lightning processes a SQL file, because TiDB Lightning cannot quickly split a single SQL file, it cannot improve the import speed of a single file by increasing concurrency. Therefore, when you import data from SQL files, avoid a single huge SQL file. TiDB Lightning works the best when the input files have a uniform size around 256 MiB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When TiDB Lightning processes a SQL file, because TiDB Lightning cannot quickly split a single SQL file, it cannot improve the import speed of a single file by increasing concurrency. Therefore, when you import data from SQL files, avoid a single huge SQL file. TiDB Lightning works best when the input files have a uniform size of around 256 MiB.
```

## Parquet

> TiDB Lightning currently only supports the Parquet file generated by Amazon Aurora. To identify its file organization in S3, use the following configuration to match all data files:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TiDB Lightning currently only supports Parquet files generated by Amazon Aurora. To identify the file structure in S3, use the following configuration to match all data files:
```

```
[[mydumper.files]]

> # The expression needed for parsing the Amazon Aurora parquet file

Reviewer: 应该不止一个吧
```suggestion
# The expression needed for parsing Amazon Aurora parquet files
```

pattern = '(?i)^(?:[^/]*/)*([a-z0-9_]+)\.([a-z0-9_]+)/(?:[^/]*/)*(?:[a-z0-9\-_.]+\.(parquet))$'
schema = '$1'
table = '$2'
type = '$3'
```

Note that this configuration only shows how to match the parquet files exported by Aurora snapshot. You need to export and process the schema file separately.

> For more information on `mydumper.files`, refer to [Match customized file](#match-customized-file).

Author: ```suggestion
For more information on `mydumper.files`, refer to [Match customized file](#match-customized-files).
```

> ## Match customized file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Match customized files
```

> TiDB Lightning only recognizes data files that follow the naming convention. In some cases, your data file might not follow the naming pattern, and thus data import is completed in a short time and zero file is processed.

Reviewer: convention vs pattern，可以统一下

Author: pattern sounds better

> TiDB Lightning only recognizes data files that follow the naming convention. In some cases, your data file might not follow the naming pattern, and thus data import is completed in a short time and zero file is processed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TiDB Lightning only recognizes data files that follow the naming convention. In some cases, your data file might not follow the naming pattern, and thus data import is completed in a short time without importing any file.
```

Take the Aurora snapshot exported to S3 as an example. The complete path of the Parquet file is `S3://some-bucket/some-subdir/some-database/some-database.some-table/part-00000-c5a881bb-58ff-4ee6-1111-b41ecff340a3-c000.gz.parquet`.

Usually, `data-source-dir` is set to `S3://some-bucket/some-subdir/some-database/` to import the `some-database` database.

Based on the preceding Parquet file path, you can write a regular expression like `(?i)^(?:[^/]*/)*([a-z0-9_]+)\.([a-z0-9_]+)/(?:[^/]*/)*(?:[a-z0-9\-_.]+\.(parquet))$` to match the files. In the match group, `index=1` is `some-database`, `index=2` is `some-table`, and `index=3` is `parquet`.

You can write the configuration file according to the regular expression and the corresponding index so that TiDB Lightning can recognize the data files that do not follow the default naming convention. For example:

```toml
[[mydumper.files]]
# The expression needed for parsing the Amazon Aurora parquet file
pattern = '(?i)^(?:[^/]*/)*([a-z0-9_]+)\.([a-z0-9_]+)/(?:[^/]*/)*(?:[a-z0-9\-_.]+\.(parquet))$'
schema = '$1'
table = '$2'
type = '$3'
```

- **schema**: The name of the target database. The value can be:

>     - The group index of the regular expression, such as `$1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The group index obtained by using a regular expression, such as `$1`.
```

    - The name of the database that you want to import, such as `db1`. All matched files are imported into `db1`.
- **table**: The name of the target table. The value can be:

>     - The group index of the regular expression, such as `$2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The group index obtained by using a regular expression, such as `$2`.
```

    - The name of the table that you want to import, such as `table1`. All matched files are imported into `table1`.

> - **type**: The file type. Supports `sql`, `parquet`, or `csv`. The value can be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **type**: The file type. Supports `sql`, `parquet`, and `csv`. The value can be:
```

>     - The group index of the regular expression, such as `$3`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The group index obtained by using a regular expression, such as `$3`.
```

- **key**: The file number, such as `001` in `${db_name}.${table_name}.001.csv`.

>     - The group index of the regular expression, such as `$4`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The group index obtained by using a regular expression, such as `$4`.
```
